WE'VE COME TO A CARIBBEAN ISLAND
WHOSE ONLY INHABITANTS
ARE MONKEYS
TO ASK THE QUESTION: WHAT CAN
THEY TEACH US ABOUT OURSELVES?
CAN WE FIND THE ROOTS
OF HUMAN MORALITY
IN HOW CHIMPANZEES SHARE?
DO CHIMPS USE TOOLS...
YOU WANT A STICK?
THE SAME WAY WE DO?
WHAT'S THE LINK
BETWEEN THIS ODD PRIMATE
AND A SPECIAL HUMAN SKILL?
IT MAKES HER SMILE.
AND WE'LL FIND OUT HOW
TO BEHAVE IN POLITE SOCIETY.
I'M ALAN ALDA.
JOIN ME AND MY NEW FRIENDS
FOR "PRIME TIME PRIMATES."
[Captioning sponsored by GTE]
PRESENTATION OF
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN FRONTIERS
IS MADE POSSIBLE BY A GRANT
FROM GTE CORPORATION.
AT GTE, IT'S AMAZING
WHAT WE CAN DO TOGETHER.
Alda:
THIS ISLAND OFF
THE COAST OF PUERTO RICO
IS A PRESERVE FOR MACAQUE
MONKEYS ORIGINALLY FROM INDIA.
MONKEYS HERE LIVE PRETTY MUCH AS
THEY WOULD IF WE WEREN'T AROUND.
IT'S A GREAT PLACE
FOR MONKEY WATCHING.
( screeching )
MONKEY WATCHING IS FASCINATING
FOR TWO REASONS--
HOW LIKE US THEY ARE
AND HOW NOT LIKE US THEY ARE.
THE BIG DIFFERENCE, OF COURSE,
IS IN OUR HEADS.
PEOPLE ARE CAPABLE OF LANGUAGE,
MATHEMATICS, CULTURE
COMPLEX SOCIAL STRUCTURES
WONDERS THAT SEEM TO US
TO BE SO FAR ABOVE
THE ABILITIES OF MONKEYS
THAT THEY MUST BE
UNIQUELY HUMAN.
BUT ARE THEY?
THAT'S THE QUESTION WE'LL BE
ASKING FOR THE NEXT HOUR.
HOW MUCH OF US IS IN THEM?
AND HOW MUCH OF THEM IS IN US?
OUR FIRST STORY IS ABOUT WHAT
THESE DAYS IS A VERY HOT TOPIC--
AGGRESSION.
MACAQUES-- RHESUS MONKEYS--
SPEND MUCH OF THEIR TIME
HANGING OUT IN LARGE GROUPS.
MOSTLY, THEY GET ALONG
JUST FINE
AND ARGUMENTS ONLY RARELY
TURN VIOLENT ENOUGH
FOR SOMEONE TO GET HURT.
AND WHEN THINGS DO GET
A LITTLE TOO STRESSFUL
THE MONKEYS HAVE PLENTY OF ROOM
ON THE ISLAND
TO GET AWAY FROM IT ALL.
BUT WHAT IF THEY LIVED
IN MORE CROWDED CONDITIONS?
THESE MONKEYS AREN'T
ON AN ISLAND.
THEY'RE IN A LARGE ENCLOSURE
AT THE YERKES PRIMATE CENTER
IN ATLANTA.
HOW THEY COPE WITH CROWDING HERE
MAY HELP US UNDERSTAND
HOW THEIR FELLOW PRIMATES,
PEOPLE, COPE WITH THE STRESS
OF LIVING IN THE CROWDED CITIES.
IT MAY LOOK AS THOUGH THE
MONKEYS HERE HAVE PLENTY OF ROOM
BUT THEY'RE 500 TIMES
MORE CROWDED
THAN THEY ARE ON THE ISLAND.
THEY'RE PART OF
A LONG-TERM EXPERIMENT
ON CROWDING IN MONKEYS
INSPIRED BY THE IDEAS OF YERKES
PRIMATOLOGIST FRANS DE WAAL.
HOW LONG HAVE PEOPLE BEEN
STUDYING CROWDING IN ANIMALS?
PROBABLY VERY LONG.
THE MOST INFLUENTIAL STUDY
CAME OUT IN THE '60s
WHERE SOMEONE DID
A STUDY ON RATS.
RATS LIVED IN A SMALL ROOM
AND AS IT GOT MORE CROWDED,
THE MORE THEY MULTIPLIED
AND THEY BECAME
VERY AGGRESSIVE.
THEY EVEN KILLED
AND ATE EACH OTHER.
Alda:
IT'S UNUSUAL HERE AT YERKES
FOR THE MONKEYS TO GET PACKED
TOGETHER THE WAY THE RATS WERE
BUT EVERY NOW AND THEN
THEY HAVE TO BE ROUNDED UP
FOR ROUTINE MEDICAL CARE.
THEY'RE USED TO THE OPERATION
AND THEY HEAD
FOR THEIR INDOOR CAGE
AS SOON AS THEIR KEEPERS APPEAR.
ONCE INSIDE, THEY'RE ANYTHING
BUT AGGRESSIVE.
IN FACT, THEIR BEHAVIOR
REMINDED ME
OF THE WAY WE HUMANS COPE WITH
BEING TIGHTLY PACKED TOGETHER.
Alda:
WHEN YOU CROWD PEOPLE
IN AN ELEVATOR
YOU DON'T TEND
TO GET AGGRESSION
YOU TEND TO GET RITUALIZED
POLITE BEHAVIOR.
PEOPLE DON'T EVEN
LOOK AT ONE ANOTHER.
YEAH, THEY AVOID
INTERACTION
AND SO THEY AVOID ANYTHING
THAT MAY CAUSE PROBLEMS
BECAUSE IT'S A VERY
CROWDED SPACE.
AND IF YOU DO
WITH RHESUS MONKEYS
AN ACUTE CROWDING EXPERIMENT--
SORT OF THE ELEVATOR EFFECT--
YOU GET SIMILAR BEHAVIOR.
THEY MAY STAY NEXT TO EACH
OTHER, BUT THEY DON'T MOVE
AND THEY DON'T INTERACT
VERY MUCH.
Alda:
SO WHEN WE'RE REALLY
PACKED TOGETHER
PEOPLE AND MONKEYS
SEEM TO COPE IN THE SAME WAY
BY BEING VERY CAREFUL.
BUT WHAT ABOUT EVERYDAY LIFE?
MONKEY SOCIETY IS BASED
ON A STRICT HIERARCHY
IN WHICH EVERYONE KNOWS
HIS OR HER PLACE.
IN THIS MODERATELY
CROWDED ENCLOSURE
ONE IMPORTANT WAY TO AVOID
CONFLICT IS BY GRINNING A LOT--
MORE SCIENTIFICALLY CALLED
"THE BARED TEETH RESPONSE."
De Waal:
THAT'S A BEHAVIOR
THAT GOES UP DRAMATICALLY
UNDER MORE CROWDED
CONDITIONS
AS IF THE SUBORDINATES ARE
TELLING THE DOMINANTS
"I'M STILL SUBORDINATE
IN THE HIERARCHY
SO YOU DON'T NEED
TO ATTACK ME."
ARE THERE SOME MONKEYS
WHERE BARING THE TEETH
IS A SIGN OF AGGRESSION?
YOU CAN SHOW YOUR
TEETH IN TWO WAYS.
IF A RHESUS MONKEY
OPENS THE MOUTH
AND STARES AT SOMEONE
THAT'S A THREAT.
BUT BARING THE TEETH
IN A SMILE TYPE OF WAY
IS A SUBMISSIVE GESTURE.
IN THE APES SUCH AS
CHIMPANZEES AND IN HUMANS
IT HAS GOT AN AFFILIATIVE
AND FRIENDLY COMPONENT
BUT STILL NERVOUSNESS
IS OFTEN INVOLVED
AND IF SOMEONE SMILES
TOO MUCH
WE SAY THAT'S
A NERVOUS PERSON.
RIGHT.
I'M A LITTLE NERVOUS
ABOUT GETTING SCRATCHED
AND BITTEN LATER.
Alda:
PETER JUDGE IS IN CHARGE
OF THE CROWDING STUDIES.
HERE'S A TYPICAL INCIDENT
IN THE LONG HOURS
HE SPENDS MONKEY WATCHING.
THIS BABY IS JUST
A FEW WEEKS OLD
AND A POPULAR PLAYMATE
FOR THE OTHER MONKEYS.
THE MOTHER, NAMED ALLIE
IS CONSTANTLY FENDING OFF
UNWANTED INVITATIONS.
( screeching )
SUDDENLY, A YOUNG MONKEY
CALLED D.J. GETS TOO ROUGH.
ALLIE THREAT D.J.
Alda:
BUT MOMENTS LATER,
D.J. APPROACHES ALLIE
AND THE TWO MONKEYS MAKE UP.
D.J. SIT
PROXIMITY ALLIE.
D.J. GROOM ALLIE.
Alda:
GROOMING EACH OTHER IS THE
MONKEY'S MAIN WAY OF RELAXING
AND HAVING A GOOD TIME TOGETHER.
WHAT PETER JUDGE FOUND
IS THAT IN THE POTENTIALLY
EXPLOSIVE CONDITIONS OF CROWDING
MONKEYS DO A LOT MORE TO KEEP
THE PEACE BETWEEN EACH OTHER
THAN THEY DO WHEN
THEY HAVE ROOM TO SPARE.
Judge:
IF YOU LOOK AT
AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR
SOME AGGRESSION GOES UP,
AND SOME DOESN'T.
IF YOU LOOK AT
FRIENDLY BEHAVIOR
ALMOST EVERY CATEGORY
OF FRIENDLY BEHAVIOR INCREASES.
IF IN A CONDITION LIKE THAT
WHERE YOU'RE ALWAYS CLOSE
TO YOUR POTENTIAL AGGRESSOR
IT'S WORTH YOUR WHILE
TO RESTORE THE RELATIONSHIP
AND RESOLVE THE CONFLICT.
Alda:
RHESUS MONKEYS HAVE BEEN OFF ON
THEIR OWN EVOLUTIONARY PATHWAY
SEPARATE FROM THE ONE
THAT LED TO HUMANS
FOR SOMETHING LIKE
30 MILLION YEARS.
MORE CLOSELY RELATED TO US--
SEPARATED BY ONLY SIX MILLION
YEARS OF EVOLUTION--
ARE CHIMPANZEES.
IT WAS WATCHING CHIMPS
THAT FIRST CONVINCED
FRANS DE WAAL 20 YEARS AGO
THAT THE HIGHER PRIMATES
ALL SHARE
A DEEPLY-ROOTED INSTINCT
FOR MAKING PEACE.
THIS GROUP OF 19 CHIMPANZEES
LIVING BELOW FRANS' OFFICE
AT YERKES
INCLUDED JIMOH, THE ALPHA MALE
OR GROUP LEADER
AND PEONY, THE DOMINANT FEMALE,
HERE WITH HER DAUGHTER.
THE ADOLESCENT MALES
IN THE GROUP
OFTEN ACT LIKE ADOLESCENTS.
BUT THE FIGHTS
RARELY GET SERIOUS
AND AS WITH THE RHESUS MONKEYS
THEY USUALLY END
IN FRIENDLY RECONCILIATIONS
THIS ONE INVOLVING
TICKLING AND LAUGHTER.
NOW WE WILL THROW THEM
IN ONE AT A TIME.
Alda:
FRANS RECENTLY BEGAN
SOME EXPERIMENTS WITH HIS CHIMPS
THAT ARE CONVINCING HIM
THAT NOT ONLY PEACEMAKING
BUT EVEN SUCH SUPPOSEDLY
HUMAN TRAITS AS MORALITY
HAVE BIOLOGICAL ROOTS
THAT WE SHARE WITH CHIMPANZEES.
THESE BUNDLES OF LEAVES
ARE A TREAT FOR THE CHIMPS
AN ADDITION TO
THEIR REGULAR DIET.
De Waal:
THAT'S A JUVENILE
WHO TOOK IT
AND THE ALPHA MALE
TAKES IT OVER FROM HIM.
Alda:
MOST OF THE CHIMPS GATHER
AROUND A BUNDLE
AND PEACEFULLY SHARE THE LEAVES.
BUT THE BUNDLE RIGHT BELOW US
WAS TAKEN BY A YOUNG FEMALE
CALLED GEORGIA
WHO IS MUCH LESS WILLING
TO SHARE.
IS GEORGIA
STINGY
BECAUSE SHE HASN'T LEARNED
TO SHARE
OR IS SHE NATURALLY STINGY?
IN HUMAN TERMS,
YOU WOULD SAY
SHE DOESN'T HAVE THE CONFIDENCE
AND THE POSITION YET
TO BE GENEROUS WITH OTHERS.
SHE'S STILL VERY MUCH
IN A COMPETITIVE MODE
LIKE "HOW MUCH
CAN I GET MYSELF?"
Alda:
GEORGIA SAT WITH HER BACK TO US
FIRMLY MONOPOLIZING HER BUNDLE.
WE COLLECT THOUSANDS
OF FOOD TRANSFERS
BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS.
AMONG ADULTS,
IT'S RECIPROCAL--
IF I SHARE WITH YOU,
YOU WILL SHARE WITH ME.
JUVENILES ARE TOTALLY
OUT OF THIS.
JUVENILES WORK ON
A STEALING OPERATION.
Alda:
GEORGIA'S TACTIC
OF STEALING BACKFIRES
AS ANOTHER JUVENILE STEALS
THE WHOLE BUNDLE FROM HER.
THAT'S A TYPICAL
JUVENILE WAY
OF DOING IT.
Alda:
GEORGIA'S SELFISHNESS
HAS OTHER CONSEQUENCES.
INDIVIDUALS
SUCH AS GEORGIA
WHO ARE NOT VERY GENEROUS--
WHEN THEY ARE IN NEED OF FOOD
THEY ARE REJECTED
BY OTHER INDIVIDUALS
AS IF THE OTHER INDIVIDUALS
ARE SAYING
"WELL, YOU'RE NEVER
SHARING WITH ME
WHY SHOULD I SHARE WITH YOU?"
AND THIS IS ALSO HOW
YOUNG FEMALES SUCH AS GEORGIA
ARE GRADUALLY LEARNING
IT IS MUCH BETTER TO COOPERATE
WITH A SYSTEM
LIKE THAT.
WE GET ACTUALLY MORE OUT OF IT
BY COOPERATING
AND CONTRIBUTING TO IT.
Alda:
FRANS AND HIS RESEARCH ASSISTANT
MIKE SERES HAVE KEPT TRACK
IN THE THOUSANDS
OF TRIALS THEY HAVE RUN
OF JUST WHO SHARES WITH WHOM.
WHAT'S REMARKABLE IS THAT
THE CHIMPS KEEP TRACK, TOO.
SO IF ONE CHIMP SHARES FOOD
WITH ANOTHER IN THE MORNING
THE GENEROSITY IS RETURNED
BY A SPELL OF GROOMING
IN THE AFTERNOON.
THE VERY YOUNG ARE ALLOWED
TO GET AWAY WITH BEHAVIOR
THAT THE FEMALES IN THIS GROUP
DON'T TOLERATE FROM
AN ADOLESCENT MALE.
HE PICKS UP A STICK
AND TRIES INTIMIDATION
BUT THE GROUP ISN'T IMPRESSED.
HERE'S GEORGIA,
AGAIN CAUSING TROUBLE.
JIMOH AMBLES OVER,
NUDGES HER GENTLY
AND SHE HOLDS OUT HER HAND
IN APOLOGY.
AGAIN, JIMOH BREAKS UP
A SQUABBLE.
SO WHILE AS IN HUMAN SOCIETY,
THERE'S CONFLICT AND AGGRESSION
CHIMPS HAVE MANY STRATEGIES
FOR KEEPING THE PEACE.
FRANS SEES IN THESE BEHAVIORS
THE ROOT OF WHAT IN HUMANS
WE CALL MORALITY.
THEY HAVE MANY OF THE EMOTIONS
AND ELEMENTS OF HUMAN MORALITY
SUCH AS EMPATHY
AND SYMPATHY PROBABLY
GENEROSITY, CERTAIN FORMS OF
ALTRUISM, RULES AND REGULATIONS
CONFLICT RESOLUTION, WHICH IS
ONE OF MY MAIN INTERESTS
IS HOW TO RESOLVE CONFLICTS
AMONG THEMSELVES.
AND BASICALLY, YOU CAN LOOK
AT HUMAN MORALITY AS A SYSTEM
THAT RESOLVES CONFLICTS
AMONG PARTIES
THAT LIVE IN ONE SOCIETY.
DOES THAT LEAD YOU TO THINK
IN A DIFFERENT WAY
ABOUT THE ORIGINS OF HUMAN
MORALITY THAN YOU DID BEFORE?
HUMAN MORALITY MUST HAVE
SOME DEEP EVOLUTIONARY ROOTS.
IT MUST COME FROM SOMEWHERE
AND PROBABLY IN OTHER ANIMALS,
WE CAN FIND NOT THE WHOLE SYSTEM
BUT WE CAN FIND CERTAIN ELEMENTS
OF HUMAN MORALITY
AND THAT'S WHAT I'M SEEING
WHEN I LOOK AT CHIMPANZEES.
Alda:
CHIMPANZEES ARE OUR CLOSEST
NONHUMAN RELATIVES.
BUT THEY'RE NOT THE ONLY
PRIMATES WITH A CODE OF ETHICS.
EVEN THOUGH THEY BRANCHED OFF
FROM US 40 MILLION YEARS AGO
THERE'S A SPECIES OF MONKEY
THAT ALSO TRADES TIT FOR TAT--
CAPUCHINS.
CAPUCHINS ARE BEING STUDIED
BY ONE OF FRANS DE WAAL'S
RESEARCH STUDENTS, LISA PARR.
CAPUCHINS ARE
WELL KNOWN
FOR BEING VERY
MANIPULATIVE IN THEIR FOOD.
SO YOU CAN SEE
THAT THEY'LL... OOPS.
HE WASN'T TOO GOOD
ABOUT THAT MANIPULATION.
HE WANTS THE WHOLE BUNCH,
NOT JUST A PIECE.
THEY ALSO HAVE
LARGE BRAINS
FOR THEIR BODY SIZE.
IT'S THE LARGEST AMONG
THE NEW WORLD MONKEYS.
AND THEY ALL HAVE
CREWCUTS, TOO.
TODAY'S EXPERIMENT WILL INVOLVE
"BIAS," A FEMALE CAPUCHIN...
Woman:
COME ON, VINCENT.
Alda:
AND VINCENT, A MALE COLLEAGUE.
VINCENT IS GIVEN
A BUCKET OF APPLES.
THEN IT'S TIME FOR US
TO DISCREETLY WITHDRAW.
THESE TWO ARE
VERY TOLERANT
OF ONE ANOTHER.
THEY'RE SITTING
CLOSE TOGETHER
DOING WHAT WE'VE TERMED
"PASSIVE FOOD SHARING."
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
IT MEANS THAT
THE FOOD POSSESSOR
IS SITTING
CLOSE ENOUGH
SO THAT
DISCARDED PIECES
AND BROKEN
BITS OF PIECES
ARE WITHIN REACH OF THE
PASSIVE FOOD PARTNER.
BECAUSE HE'S NOT
PREVENTING HER
FROM TAKING THE FOOD,
THAT'S SHARING.
IS THERE
ANY INDICATION
HE'S LEAVING THESE
PIECES DELIBERATELY
IN SOME WAY?
I MEAN, IS HE
JUST A SLOPPY EATER
THAT DOESN'T CARE
WHO GRABS HIS FOOD?
WELL, WE HAVE CONTROL
STUDIES THAT WE DO
WHERE THERE'S ONLY
ONE ANIMAL IN THE CAGE
AND UNDER THOSE
CIRCUMSTANCES
THE ANIMAL USUALLY DOESN'T
SIT CLOSE TO THE MESH
SO THE PIECES AREN'T
LEFT WITHIN REACH.
Alda:
SO CAPUCHINS, TOO,
SHARE AND SHARE ALIKE.
IT SEEMS THAT NO MATTER WHAT
PRIMATE SPECIES HE LOOKS AT
FRANS DE WAAL FINDS EVIDENCE
OF COOPERATION AND PEACEMAKING.
Alda:
IT SEEMS KIND OF
A REASSURING IDEA
THAT THIS DRIVE FOR HOLDING DOWN
VIOLENCE COMES NATURALLY TO...
TO OUR COUSINS
AND PROBABLY TO US.
I'M GLAD YOU SAID "NATURALLY"
BECAUSE USUALLY PEOPLE
USE ANIMALS ONLY
FOR THE BAD SIDE
OF HUMAN NATURE.
LIKE WHAT PEOPLE DO IN RWANDA
WE SAY THEY ARE
ACTING LIKE ANIMALS.
AS SOON AS WE DO SOMETHING BAD
IT'S BEASTLY BEHAVIOR.
IF WE DO SOMETHING GOOD
IT'S OUR NOBLE HUMAN NATURE
THAT CAUSES IT
AND I THINK WE HAVE
BOTH SIDES IN US
AND WE CAN SEE BOTH SIDES
IN OTHER PRIMATES
IS THAT WE HAVE AGGRESSIVE
TENDENCIES, VIOLENT TENDENCIES.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME
WE HAVE MECHANISMS TO DEAL
WITH THESE ISSUES.
Alda:
LIKE HUMAN BABIES
CHIMP BABIES ARE DEPENDENT
ON THEIR MOTHERS
WHEN THEY'RE BORN AND
FOR A LONG TIME AFTERWARDS
AS THEY LEARN TO
BECOME GOOD CHIMPS.
BUT WHEN CHIMPS ARE
BORN IN CAPTIVITY
MOTHERS DON'T SEEM ABLE
TO TEACH THEIR BABIES
THE PROPER RULES
OF CHIMP SOCIETY.
SO AT YERKES, BABIES ARE BROUGHT
HERE TO THE CHIMP NURSERY
WHERE IT'S UP TO HUMANS TO TEACH
THEM HOW TO BECOME GOOD CHIMPS.
ABANDONED AT BIRTH
THREE-WEEK-OLD JULIE IS
NOW BEING RAISED BY KIM BARD
WHO TRIES TO BE
AS CHIMPLIKE AS SHE CAN.
Bard:
WE NURTURE THEM AS BABIES
CHIMPANZEE-STYLE.
WE DON'T WANT THEM TO BE HUMANS
WE WANT THEM TO BE
GOOD CHIMPANZEES.
SO HUMAN BABIES
YOU WOULD FEED LYING DOWN
CHIMP BABIES EAT LIKE THIS.
WHAT ARE YOU
SMILING AT?
IS THAT A SMILE?
YES, THAT'S
A SMILE.
SHE SMILES WITH
THE BOTTOM TEETH
A LITTLE
LIKE BOB HOPE.
THEY SMILE WITH
THE BOTTOM GUMS
IN HER CASE, SHOWING.
IF YOU SEE
THE TOP TEETH
IT'S BY DEFINITION NOT
A SMILE ON A CHIMPANZEE.
Alda:
LIKE HUMAN BABIES, CHIMP BABIES
ARE MAGNETS TO ADULTS.
I MUST BE AT LEAST
AS PROGRAMMED AS SHE IS
BECAUSE I GOT A LOT
MORE INTERESTED
AS SOON AS SHE
GRABBED MY FINGERS.
DO YOU FIND
THAT HAPPENING
IN A MOTHER CHIMP
IF THE BABY GRABS
ONTO HER?
SHE HAS THE BABY
GRABBING ONTO HER
ALL THE TIME.
AND WHAT SHE DOES IS
DO THESE KINDS OF...
WHAT DOES IT DO WHEN
I MOVE HER LEG?
I MOVE THE OTHER LEG?
Alda:
AND SOON I WAS PLAYING
MOTHER CHIMP.
SO WHAT HAPPENS
IF I DO THIS?
THAT MAKES HER SMILE.
AND A ONE AND A TWO AND
A THREE AND A FOUR AND A FIVE.
LOOK AT THIS,
THE BEGINNING OF AEROBICS.
OH, YOU WANT TO DO PULL-UPS?
OH, GOOD, VERY...
AND TWO AND THREE.
ONE MORE, YOU CAN DO IT,
YOU CAN DO IT.
AND FOUR.
SHE'S SMILING, SHE LOVES IT.
Alda:
IN THEIR OWN SOCIAL GROUPS
YOUNG CHIMPS INTERACT WITH
RELATIVES OF ALL AGES--
BROTHERS, SISTERS, COUSINS,
AUNTS AND UNCLES.
THEY LEARN ESSENTIAL
CHIMP MANNERS
THE DOs AND DON'Ts
OF CHIMP SOCIETY.
MOST IMPORTANT, YOUNG FEMALES,
SOON TO BE MOTHERS THEMSELVES
LEARN HOW TO HANDLE BABIES.
SO IN THE NURSERY, YOUNG
FEMALE CHIMPS ARE ENCOURAGED
TO PLAY WITH YOUNGER ANIMALS.
TODAY, EVELYNE, AGE THREE
IS THERE TO HELP LOOK
AFTER ANDIE, WHO'S 18 MONTHS.
( screeching )
UNTIL THE NURSERY PROGRAM BEGAN
MANY FEMALE CHIMPS
RAISED IN CAPTIVITY
WERE UNPREPARED FOR MOTHERHOOD.
Woman:
THERE HAVE BEEN MOTHERS
AROUND INFANTS WHO GO:
"I DON'T KNOW WHAT
TO DO WHEN THEY CRY.
SHOULD I PICK THEM UP
OR TOSS THEM SOMEWHERE?"
THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT OCCURS IN THE WILD.
A LOT OF JUVENILES
GET EXPERIENCE
WITH THE YOUNGER SIBLINGS
AND THEY KNOW--
THEY LEARN HOW TO REACT.
Woman:
PROTECT HER,
PROTECT ANDIE-- GOOD.
Alda:
EVELYNE GOT A LITTLE WORRIED
BY OUR CAMERA.
ANDIE WAS DISPLAYING AT YOU ALL
AND EVELYNE WANTS HER TO KEEP
HER DISTANCE A LITTLE BIT
SO SHE KIND OF GRABBED HER BACK.
EVELYNE IS BEING VERY
PROTECTIVE TOWARDS ANDIE.
Alda:
WHILE EVELYNE WAS THE PERFECT
OLDER SISTER WITH ANDIE
SEVEN-MONTH-OLD LINDSAY
WAS A BIT MORE PUZZLING.
Woman:
OH, THAT WAS TOO MUCH.
THAT'S RIGHT, GIVE HER A HUG.
Alda:
CURIOSITY TOOK
OVER FROM CARING
UNTIL FINALLY A TOE
WAS JUST TOO TEMPTING.
( squeals )
OH, THAT WAS
TOO MUCH.
THAT WAS TOO MUCH.
HELLO.
Alda:
THEN IT WAS MY TURN.
HEY, LUCAS.
HEY, LITTLE
THINGS.
HELLO, PAL,
WHAT DO YOU SAY?
Alda:
I HAD BEEN CAUTIONED
TO EXPECT ANYTHING.
DO YOU WANT TO SIT?
MERLIN'S VERY HAPPY.
WHAT DO YOU SAY?
HOW ARE YOU?
Woman:
GOOD BOY.
YEAH!
Alda:
SO FAR, SO GOOD.
AND NOW IT WAS TIME FOR ME
TO LEARN A FEW CHIMP MANNERS.
Bard:
IT'S OKAY.
NOW, THAT SCARED ME.
DOES HE MIND IF I GET SCARED?
YES, IT WILL
SCARE HIM, TOO.
IF HE COMES UP IN
MY FACE LIKE THAT
IS HE TRYING
TO SCARE ME?
NO, HE'S SCARED.
THIS ONE'S POKING ME IN THE EAR.
HE'S GROOMING.
HE'S TELLING YOU
HE'S NERVOUS
AND THE WAY TO
CALM CHIMPANZEES
WHEN THEY'RE NERVOUS
BOTH TO MAKE YOU
A LITTLE CALMER
AND TO MAKE HIM
CALMER IS TO GROOM.
HOW WOULD
I DO THAT?
DON'T LOOK AT THEIR FACE
BUT YOU LOOK AT THE PART
THAT YOU'RE GROOMING
AND IMMEDIATELY
YOU'RE GOING TO FIND
THAT THEY RELAX
AND NOT MOVE
AND GET INTO THIS
VERY STILL POSTURE.
WE MAKE CHIMPANZEE
GROOMING SOUNDS.
EITHER A...
( sucks teeth )
OR THE KIND THAT
KATHY MAKES IS A...
( blows raspberries ).
BUT IT'S A VERY
FOCUSED ATTENTION.
THAT GOT HIS
ATTENTION A LOT.
AND HE JUST CALMS
IMMEDIATELY.
( sucking teeth )
HE'S GROOMING.
Kathy:
IS HE
GROOMING YOU?
I THINK HE'S TRYING
TO EAT MY CHIN HERE.
Bard:
DO YOU LIKE HIS
AFTERSHAVE, MERLIN?
IF YOU HAVE
A FRECKLE
THAT MIGHT BE
INTRIGUING.
A FRECKLE?
WHAT, DO THEY LIKE THEM
FOR DESSERT, OR WHAT?
THIS IS A WAY
TO ASK FOR PLAY.
WHEN THEY
PUT THEIR HAND
ON THEIR HEAD?
LIKE, "TICKLE
ME RIGHT THERE."
NOW, IF I WERE TO ASK
FOR A LITTLE TICKLING.
THEY'RE NOT REALLY WATCHING.
YOU NEED TO GET
REALLY LOOSE
AND SO YOU GET LOOSE.
I'M GOING TO GET
REALLY LOOSE NOW.
AND WHENEVER
THEY TOUCH YOU
EVEN IF THEY
DON'T MEAN IT AS
TICKLING, YOU LAUGH.
( imitates
chimp hooting )
Alda:
UNFORTUNATELY, MY CHIMP LAUGH
DIDN'T SEEM TOO CONVINCING
ESPECIALLY TO MERLIN.
OUCH!
Bard:
THAT'S NOT NICE.
WHAT SHOULD I DO?
HE'S SAYING,
"I'M REALLY SORRY."
Alda:
MERLIN AND I MADE UP
AS ALL GOOD CHIMPS SHOULD.
THAT'S OKAY.
AND HERE IN THE YERKES NURSERY,
THAT'S THE GOAL:
REARING CHIMPS TO BE THE
BEST CHIMPS THEY CAN BE.
PUT SOME HONEY
IN HERE.
Alda:
EVERY ONCE IN A WHILE
MIKE TOMASELLO GIVES THE CHIMPS
AT YERKES SOME HONEY.
...WHERE THEY POKE
STICKS INTO HOLES
AND BEEHIVES AND...
Alda:
IN THE WILD, CHIMPS OFTEN USE
SIMPLE TOOLS TO GET AT FOOD.
THEY CRACK OPEN NUTS WITH ROCKS
AND POKE STICKS
INTO BEEHIVES FOR HONEY.
YOU WANT A STICK?
THIS USE OF TOOLS
SEEMS VERY HUMANLIKE
YET ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF THE
BEHAVIOR APES SHARE WITH HUMANS.
IT HAS EVEN LED TO SPECULATION
THAT APES LEARN SKILLS
AND PASS THEM ONTO OTHERS,
JUST AS WE DO.
BUT IS THAT REALLY
WHAT'S HAPPENING?
HOW DO THEY LEARN
TO DO THIS?
DO THEY LEARN
THE SAME WAY WE DO?
WELL, THERE ARE A COUPLE
OF DIFFERENT THEORIES
ABOUT HOW THEY MIGHT
GO ABOUT LEARNING IT.
I WOULD SAY THEY DO
GO ABOUT LEARNING IT
IN VERY MUCH THE SAME WAY
THAT A CHILD WOULD.
THEY ARE EXPOSED TO THE TOOL
THEY HAVE A PROBLEM
IN FRONT OF THEM
AND THEY EITHER SOME COMBINATION
OF TRIAL AND ERROR OR
INSIGHTFUL PROBLEM SOLVING.
IN MANY CASES THEY DO EMPLOY
INSIGHTFUL PROBLEM SOLVING
IN THE SENSE THAT THEY DON'T
HAVE TO TRY OUT EVERY SOLUTION.
THEY CAN LOOK AT THE PROBLEM AND
SEE WHICH ONE MIGHT WORK BETTER.
Alda:
THAT CHIMPS CAN FIGURE OUT FOR
THEMSELVES HOW TO USE A STICK
TO GET HONEY IS
IMPRESSIVE ENOUGH.
BUT CAN THEY PICK UP THE SKILL
BY WATCHING OTHERS AS WE CAN?
TO HELP ANSWER THAT QUESTION
MIKE TOMASELLO HAS RECRUITED
ANOTHER PRIMATE SPECIES
A CLOSE RELATIVE OF BOTH
CHIMPANZEES AND GORILLAS--
THE ORANGUTAN.
ORANGS ARE MORE PLACID AND
EASIER TO WORK WITH THAN CHIMPS
ALTHOUGH THEY HAVE
THEIR LITTLE FOIBLES.
Alda:
IS IT OKAY TO LOOK
THEM IN THE EYE?
HE MIGHT SPIT AT YOU,
BUT OTHERWISE
IT'LL BE FINE.
Alda:
THIS IS INEY.
MY JOB WAS TO TRY TEACHING HER
HOW TO USE A RAKE
TO GET A PIECE OF FRUIT.
LOOK AT THIS,
LOOK AT THIS.
Alda:
I MADE A SHOW OF TURNING
THE RAKE OVER
MAKING IT EASIER
TO PULL IN THE APPLE.
GOOD, MMM.
Alda:
INEY IGNORED MY ADVICE.
TIRAM LOOKED UNCOOPERATIVE
FROM THE START.
THIS TIME MY RAKE WAS
ALREADY TURNED OVER
SO I SIMPLY PULLED IT IN.
TIRAM ALSO IGNORED MY ACTION
AND EXPERIMENTED ON HIS OWN.
GOOD JOB,
GOOD JOB, TIRAM.
WHAT I DID WITH THE RAKE
DIDN'T SEEM TO MATTER.
NOW, I DON'T GET IT.
I DIDN'T TURN IT OVER.
BUT TIRAM DID TURN
THE RAKE OVER-- WHY?
BECAUSE TIRAM
IS GOING TO DO
WHATEVER HE IS
GOING TO DO
REGARDLESS OF WHAT
YOU'RE DOING.
HE'S FIGURING OUT
HOW TO DO IT.
I THINK THE REASON
THAT THEY DON'T DO
EXACTLY WHAT I DO IS
THAT I DON'T GRAB IT
WITH MY FEET.
I'M JUST USING MY HANDS.
Alda:
TOMASELLO BELIEVES THAT
WHAT APES LEARN FROM OTHERS
IS THE GENERAL IDEA
THAT A TOOL CAN BE USEFUL
NOT THE EXACT DETAILS
OF HOW TO USE IT.
Alda:
SO THEY BENEFIT
FROM SEEING IT USED
AND THEY COME OVER TO THE PLACE
WHERE IT'S BEING USED
AND THEY'LL PICK IT UP
AND USE IT
BUT THEY WON'T EXACTLY
IMITATE THE USE.
IT'S NOT LIKE A CARPENTER
TEACHING HIS DAUGHTER
HOW TO USE A PLANE.
Alda:
THIS DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
HOW APES LEARN
AND HOW CHILDREN LEARN IS
MIKE TOMASELLO'S MAIN INTEREST.
THIS IS
MATTHEW.
HEY, MATTHEW.
HEY.
HI, THIS IS FUN.
Alda:
AND I FINALLY GOT TO WORK
WITH A PRIMATE SPECIES
I'M A BIT MORE USED TO.
THAT'S AN AIRPLANE.
YEAH, IT'S
AN AIRPLANE.
THAT'S GOOD,
THAT'S VERY GOOD.
Alda:
TOMASELLO HAS SET UP
AN EXPERIMENT WITH CHILDREN
SIMILAR TO THE ONE WITH ORANGS.
WATCH ME, MATTHEW.
Alda:
WITH THE RAKE ALREADY ON
ITS BACK, I PULL IN THE TOY.
THE KEY POINT IS THAT
I DIDN'T TURN THE RAKE OVER.
IT WAS ALREADY
THE WAY I WANTED IT.
AND MATTHEW ALSO DOESN'T
TURN THE RAKE OVER
EVEN THOUGH IT WOULD OBVIOUSLY
WORK BETTER IF HE DID.
Tomasello:
IT'S ALAN'S TURN.
NEXT TIME, I MAKE A SHOW
OF FLIPPING THE RAKE.
( both laughing )
NOW IT'S
MATTHEW'S TURN.
Woman:
THAT LOOKS LIKE FUN.
Alda:
AND THAT'S ALL MATTHEW NEEDS.
Woman:
ALL RIGHT.
GOOD JOB, MATTHEW.
MIKE'S GOING
TO DROP IT HERE.
RACHEL, WATCH.
NOW, WATCH ME.
Alda:
WITH RACHEL, I AGAIN MAKE
A BIG DEAL OF FLIPPING THE RAKE.
AND I TAKE
IT OUT, SEE?
MIKE'S GOING
TO DROP IT IN.
NOW, IT'S YOUR TURN.
YOU TRY IT.
Alda:
RACHEL GETS IT AT ONCE.
BUT LIKE THE ORANGS, SHE PUTS
HER OWN SPIN ON THE SOLUTION.
( all laughing )
THAT'S VERY GOOD.
YOU'RE PRETTY
GOOD WITH THAT.
OH, MY TURN, OKAY.
Alda:
BUT AFTER AGAIN WATCHING
WHAT I DO WITH THE RAKE
RACHEL IMITATES MY
ACTIONS PRECISELY.
AND IT'S THIS ABILITY
TO EXACTLY IMITATE
THAT MIKE TOMASELLO BELIEVES
IS THE KEY DIFFERENCE
IN HOW HUMANS LEARN
WHEN COMPARED TO APES.
IT GIVES KIDS LIKE ANNA
A SHORT CUT TO LEARNING
THAT APES DON'T HAVE.
Mike:
NOW, YOUR TURN.
Alda:
AND IT MAY BE
WHAT ENABLES US TO PASS ON
FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION
EVERYTHING THAT'S
BEEN LEARNED BEFORE.
Alda:
VERY GOOD.
Mike:
GOOD JOB, GOOD.
Alda:
THE WAY CHIMPS USE
STICKS TO GET HONEY
IS A REMINDER OF BOTH
HOW LIKE US THEY ARE
AND HOW NOT LIKE US THEY ARE,
AND IT GIVES US ANOTHER INSIGHT
INTO WHAT MAKES HUMANS
SO DIFFERENT.
YOU THINK THERE'S ANYTHING WE
CAN LEARN ABOUT THE WAY WE LEARN
BY STUDYING THIS MORE BASIC
WAY THAT CHIMPS LEARN?
OFTEN WITH HUMANS THE PROBLEM IS
WE ARE SO IMMERSED IN SOMETHING
WE CAN'T GET OUT
OF IT TO SEE IT.
WE'VE ALL EXPERIENCED
GOING TO ANOTHER CULTURE
AND SEEING THEM DO
SOMETHING DIFFERENTLY
AND WE DIDN'T REALIZE
WHAT WE DID
UNTIL WE SAW THAT IT
COULD BE DONE DIFFERENTLY.
AND I THINK THAT'S
A LOT OF THE VALUE
OF STUDYING NONHUMAN PRIMATES
IS TO SEE HOW SOMETHING
IS DONE DIFFERENTLY.
EVEN THOUGH THE WAY APES LEARN
IS DIFFERENT FROM
THE WAY HUMANS LEARN
WHEN APES ARE REARED
AND TAUGHT BY HUMANS
THEY CAN LEARN SOME
SURPRISINGLY HUMAN SKILLS.
THE BEST KNOWN OF THESE IS
WHEN CHIMPS AND SOME GORILLAS
HAVE BEEN TAUGHT
A SIMPLE LANGUAGE.
BUT WHAT'S NOT SO WELL KNOWN
IS THAT SOME CHIMPS HAVE BEEN
TAUGHT ELEMENTARY MATH SKILLS.
Alda:
THIS IS THE PLAYGROUND OF
A UNIQUE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
HOUSED AT OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY
WHERE SALLY BOYSEN IS TEACHING
CHIMPANZEES TO COUNT.
WE'RE GOING
TO DO TWO.
ONE, TWO--
SEE THAT?
WHERE'S
THE TWO?
THAT'S IT!
LUCKY YOU.
ONE, TWO.
Alda:
BOB, FOUR YEARS OLD,
IS ONE OF HER YOUNGEST PUPILS.
BUT WE'RE
NOT DONE YET.
LET'S TRY A COOKIE.
WAIT, I'VE GOT
TO SHOW YOU.
CAN YOU SHOW ME
WHERE ONE IS?
THERE IT
IS-- GOOD!
WE NEED TO MAKE
IT LIGHT UP.
MAKE IT LIGHT
UP-- GOOD!
Alda:
LIKE MOST FOUR-YEAR-OLDS, BOB'S
ATTENTION SOMETIMES WANDERS.
HE'S LEARNING THOSE
FIRST TWO NUMBERS
AND ONCE... I KNEW HE
WAS GOING TO DO THAT.
HIS ATTENTION SPAN
IS A LOT SHORTER
THAN A CHILD'S.
WE INVEST A LOT
MORE TIME IN PLAYING
AND SOCIAL INTERACTION
THAN IN ACTUAL TRAINING.
THAT'S KIND OF THE OPPOSITE
OF WHAT YOU SEE WITH CHILDREN.
THEY SPEND A COUPLE HOURS AT
SCHOOL AND 15 MINUTES IN RECESS.
WE SPEND 15 MINUTES IN SCHOOL
AND TWO HOURS IN RECESS.
Alda:
WHILE BOB IS STILL
IN KINDERGARTEN
10-YEAR-OLD SHEBA IS
ALREADY A FIRST-GRADER.
SEVEN.
THAT WAS THE
RIGHT ANSWER.
Alda:
SHE'S LEARNING HER NUMBERS
FROM ONE THROUGH SEVEN.
THIS, THIS, THIS,
HOW MANY IS THAT?
HOW MANY
IS IT?
FIVE IS THE
RIGHT ANSWER!
YOU GET
THEM ALL!
OKAY,
GOOD WORK.
Alda:
SHEBA ALSO UNDERSTANDS ZERO.
OKAY, LOOK,
SHEBA?
HOW MANY THINGS
DO WE HAVE THERE?
NONE-- THERE
ARE NO CANDIES.
Alda:
AND SOMETIMES SHE
RUNS THE CLASS HERSELF.
YOU THINK YOU SHOULD GET
REINFORCED ANYWAY?
HOW MANY IS THAT?
IT WAS ONE-- GOOD!
I DON'T EVEN
HAVE TO BE HERE.
Alda:
NOW THAT SHEBA KNOWS HER NUMBERS
SALLY PLANS A NEW CHALLENGE.
SHE PUTS THREE PEACHES
IN ONE BOX...
AND THREE PEACHES IN ANOTHER.
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME
A CHIMP HAS EVER BEEN GIVEN
AN ADDITION PROBLEM.
HOW MANY
PEACHES?
HOW MANY?
SHOW ME.
YES, SIX IS THE
RIGHT ANSWER!
GOOD GIRL!
SIX PEACHES OUT THERE!
Alda:
SHEBA MUST COUNT
THE FIRST SET OF PEACHES
HOLD THAT NUMBER IN HER HEAD
THEN CONTINUE THE COUNTING
WITH THE SECOND SET.
PICK THE RIGHT
ANSWER-- FIVE! GOOD!
Alda:
WITHOUT EVER BEING
TRAINED TO ADD
SHEBA GETS IT RIGHT
THE FIRST TIME.
THEN SALLY MAKES THE TASK
EVEN HARDER
BY REPLACING THE PEACHES
WITH PLASTIC NUMBERS.
SEE THAT ONE?
HERE WE GO.
HOW MANY
WAS THAT?
CAN YOU PICK?
SHOW ME.
FOUR!
Alda:
ALTHOUGH SHEBA'S PERFORMANCE
MAY SEEM ASTONISHING
SALLY ISN'T SURPRISED.
TO FIND CAPABILITIES
IN THE RANGE WE HAVE
WITH NUMERICAL CONCEPTS
IS NOT SURPRISING TO ME.
IT MEANS WE HAVE
TO RETHINK OUR IDEAS
ABOUT WHAT HUMANNESS IS ABOUT
AND ALSO WHAT
CHIMPANZEE-NESS IS ABOUT.
Alda:
THERE'S ONE NUMBERS GAME
SALLY HAS DEVISED
THAT NEATLY DEMONSTRATES
SHEBA'S CHIMPANZEE-NESS.
WANT TO SIT
RIGHT HERE?
Alda:
ONE OF THE PLAYERS IS SARAH.
HER JOB IS TO EAT CANDIES.
SHEBA'S JOB IS TO CHOOSE
HOW MANY CANDIES SARAH GETS.
ONE, TWO, THREE,
FOUR DOWN HERE.
ARE YOU WATCHING,
MISS PRISS?
Alda:
HERE'S HOW THE GAME WORKS.
WHICH SHOULD WE
GIVE TO SARAH?
Alda:
WHICHEVER SET OF CANDY SHEBA
POINTS TO FIRST GOES TO SARAH.
SARAH GETS FOUR,
SHEBA ONLY GETS TWO...
Alda:
SHEBA GETS WHAT'S LEFT.
SO IF SHEBA UNDERSTANDS THE GAME
SHE SHOULD PICK
THE SMALLER AMOUNT FIRST.
FIVE IN THAT ONE,
ONE IN THERE.
WHICH ONE DO YOU
WANT SARAH TO HAVE?
SARAH GETS THESE.
Alda:
BUT NO MATTER HOW MANY
TIMES THEY TRY IT
SHEBA ALWAYS POINTS
TO THE LARGER AMOUNT FIRST.
IT'S A GAME SHE JUST CAN'T SEEM
TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO WIN.
SALLY HAS A HUNCH
THAT MAKING THE TASK
MORE ABSTRACT MIGHT HELP.
WHICH ONE
DO YOU WANT--
YOU WANT TO GIVE
TWO TO SARAH.
Alda:
AND REMARKABLY, SHEBA NOW PICKS
THE SMALLER NUMBER FIRST.
OH, YOU LUCKY GIRL.
ONE, TWO, THREE,
FOUR, FIVE, SIX.
Alda:
SARAH IS NOT THAT IMPRESSED
BY SHEBA'S NEW SKILL.
WE HAVE A FOUR HERE--
WAIT TILL I SHOW YOU
WHAT ELSE WE GOT.
LOOK HERE.
NOW, WHICH SHOULD
WE GIVE TO SARAH?
TWO-- WE'LL GIVE
SARAH TWO.
Alda:
SALLY BOYSEN SUSPECTS
THAT BECAUSE OF SHEBA'S
NATURAL GREEDINESS
SHE CAN'T RESIST
THE CANDIES THEMSELVES.
BUT THE NUMBERS
ENGAGE HER REASON
ALLOWING HER TO PLAY
THE GAME INTELLIGENTLY.
( hooting )
UNLIKE SHEBA, THE MALES
IN SALLY'S GROUP
ARE TOO BIG AND TOO AGGRESSIVE
TO BE LET OUT OF THEIR CAGES.
OH, LOOK AT
THAT BIG TOE!
I GOT YOUR TOE REAL
GOOD, DIDN'T I?
Alda:
STILL, SALLY HAS FOUND A WAY
TO PLAY WITH THEM
AND TO WORK WITH THEM.
DARRELL, HOW MUCH
OF A PEACH IS THIS?
HALF OF A
PEACH, RIGHT.
Alda:
DARRELL IS WORKING ON FRACTIONS.
IT'S A HALF
OF A PEACH.
THAT'S RIGHT.
WHAT'S THAT IN YOUR
MOUTH, A PEACH PIT?
THANK YOU.
YUMMY, YUMMY.
HOW MANY OF THESE
DO I HAVE?
TWO BANANAS,
RIGHT.
THERE'S TWO
BANANAS HERE.
NOW WATCH WHAT I'M GOING TO DO.
I CUT LIKE THIS,
AND ONE MORE TIME
NOW I HAVE THIS
LITTLE WEENSY PIECE.
A FOURTH OF
A BANANA-- RIGHT!
Alda:
WHEN SALLY CUTS THE FRUIT
IN FRONT OF HIM
DARRELL CHOOSES
THE CORRECT FRACTION.
I'VE GOT
ANOTHER FOURTH,
THAT'S RIGHT.
DARRELL HAS TO UNDERSTAND
THERE ARE WHOLE THINGS
AND PARTS OF THINGS,
AND WE CAN ASSIGN A NAME
FOR DIFFERENT PARTS
OF AN APPLE, FOR EXAMPLE.
SO THERE'S A SPECIAL
NAME FOR HALF AN APPLE
AND A SPECIAL NAME FOR
ONE-FOURTH OF AN APPLE...
( chimps shrieking )
Alda:
THE CHIMPS AREN'T HAPPY
WHEN SALLY TURNS HER
ATTENTION TO THE CAMERA
BUT THEY FIGURE OUT A WAY
TO GET REVENGE.
SOON THEY'RE CALM ENOUGH
TO START WORK AGAIN.
DARRELL'S NEXT CHALLENGE
IS TO FIGURE OUT
WHAT FRACTION OF A PEAR
THIS REPRESENTS
WITHOUT ACTUALLY SEEING
THE FRUIT CUT UP.
IT'S NOT A HALF--
YOU'RE GUESSING
ALL OF THEM.
GUESSING
I WANT TO SHOW
YOU SOMETHING.
LOOK, WHAT IF I TOOK
A WHOLE PEAR LIKE THIS?
THIS IS ONE PEAR,
ISN'T IT?
AND I'M GOING TO
CUT IT UP FOR YOU.
DARRELL'S
STILL NOT ABLE
TO RELIABLY PICK
THE CORRECT FRACTION.
IT REALLY HELPS HIM
STILL AT THIS PHASE
OF HIS UNDERSTANDING
OF THE CONCEPT
TO SEE A WHOLE
PIECE OF FRUIT
DIVIDED
INTO PORTIONS.
BUT WE'RE WORKING
TOWARDS THAT.
DARRELL, LOOK HOW MANY
PIECES I CUT THIS INTO--
ONE, TWO, THREE,
FOUR-- THAT'S RIGHT.
IT MEANS THIS IS
ONLY ONE FOURTH!
THAT'S GOOD, THAT'S ONE-
FOURTH, THAT'S RIGHT.
DO YOU WANT IT?
YOU DON'T
WANT IT? OKAY.
WOULD YOU RATHER HAVE
A PIECE OF CANDY?
ALL RIGHT,
THERE YOU GO.
YOU CAN STAY HERE.
WE'RE STILL WORKING.
ARE YOU GOING TO BE AFRAID
OF DOGS YOUR WHOLE LIFE?
Alda:
SALLY BELIEVES THAT
CHIMPS, LIKE HUMANS
HAVE AN INTUITIVE
UNDERSTANDING OF NUMBERS.
IT ISN'T THAT SALLY IS
TEACHING THEM TO COUNT
OR ADD OR DO FRACTIONS.
INSTEAD, SHE'S SIMPLY GIVING
HER CHIMPANZEES AN OPPORTUNITY
TO SHOW US WHAT THEY CAN DO.
( Sally imitates chimp hooting )
UH-OH,
DON'T HURT HIM.
DON'T HURT SKYLER.
Alda:
THESE ARE PRIMATES, TOO.
LEMURS-- THE MOST DISTANT
OF OUR PRIMATE COUSINS.
LEMURS BRANCHED OFF
FROM THE FAMILY TREE
70 MILLION YEARS AGO.
COMMON THEN,
THEY LIVE WILD TODAY
ONLY ON THE ISLAND
OF MADAGASCAR.
BUT ABOUT 500 LEMURS ALSO
LIVE HERE IN NORTH CAROLINA
IN A FOREST OWNED
BY DUKE UNIVERSITY.
SOME LEMURS ARE NOCTURNAL.
THEY WAKE UP ONLY
WHEN IT GETS DARK.
THIS LEMUR IS AN AYE-AYE.
HIS NAME IS NOSFERATU.
IN MADAGASCAR, THE AYE-AYE
IS CONSIDERED AN EVIL OMEN
AND OFTEN SHOT ON SIGHT.
AYE-AYES ARE ONE OF THE MOST
HIGHLY-ENDANGERED PRIMATES
IN THE WORLD.
AND ONE OF THE WEIRDEST.
TO EAT BREAKFAST,
NOSFERATU SCOOPS OUT AN EGG
USING HIS EXTRAORDINARY
SIX-INCH LONG MIDDLE FINGER.
BREAKFAST OVER,
NOSFERATU GOES FORAGING
MUCH AS HE WOULD IN THE FOREST
LOOKING FOR WORMS
AND INSECT LARVAE
LIVING INSIDE TREE BRANCHES.
HOW HE DOES IT
FASCINATES DUKE UNIVERSITY
PSYCHOLOGIST CARL ERICKSON.
HOW DO YOU FIND FOOD
IN A RAIN FOREST AT NIGHT
WHEN IT'S RATHER RARE
AND IT'S HIDDEN BELOW
THE SURFACE OF THE TREE?
IT SEEMS LIKE
A FORMIDABLE PROBLEM
AND I WOULD REALLY LIKE
TO KNOW WHAT'S IN HIS HEAD
WHEN HE DOES THAT.
Alda:
TO FIND OUT WHAT'S
IN NOSFERATU'S HEAD
CARL IS MAKING AN
ARTIFICIAL TREE BRANCH
COMPLETE WITH HIDING
PLACES FOR WORMS.
HE'S GOING TO TEST THREE
DIFFERENT HYPOTHESES
ABOUT HOW THE AYE-AYE
IS FINDING ITS PREY.
THE FIRST HYPOTHESIS IS
THAT NOSFERATU'S SHARP EARS
CAN HEAR THE WORMS EVEN
WHEN THEY'RE DEEP IN THE WOOD.
PERHAPS WHEN HE TAPS,
THE PREY GET EXCITED
HE HEARS THAT EXCITEMENT
AND SO HE GOES
FOR THE ACT OF PREY.
ONE WAY TO MAKE TO SURE
THAT HE CAN'T HEAR THEM
IS TO HAVE THEM DEAD.
Alda:
CHOPPED UP AND
THEREFORE SILENT WORMS
TEST THE SECOND POSSIBILITY
THAT NOSFERATU SMELLS HIS PREY
RATHER THAN HEARING IT.
THE THIRD OPTION IS
THAT IT'S NOT THE WORMS
BUT THE HOLES THE AYE-AYE FINDS,
SO ONE IS LEFT EMPTY.
THE CAVITIES ARE TWO INCHES
BENEATH THE SURFACE.
NOSFERATU CAN'T WAIT
TO BEGIN THE HUNT.
Erickson:
HE IS VERY EAGER
AND AS YOU CAN SEE OFTENTIMES
I CAN'T GET THE WOODBLOCKS IN
FAST ENOUGH FOR HIM.
Alda:
NOSFERATU HAS NO TROUBLE
FINDING THE FIRST CAVITY
WITH THE LIVE WORMS.
AFTER FISHING THEM OUT,
HE MOVES ON
AND AT ONCE HE FINDS THE HOLE
WITH THE DEAD WORMS.
BUT WORMS, LIVE OR DEAD, DON'T
SEEM TO BE WHAT HE'S LOCATING
BECAUSE SOON HE FINDS
THE EMPTY CAVITY AS WELL.
IT'S THE CAVITIES, NOT THE
WORMS, HE'S SEARCHING FOR.
WHAT WE NEED TO DO THEN IS FIND
OUT WHAT IT IS ABOUT CAVITIES
THAT IS SO INTERESTING
TO THE AYE-AYE.
Alda:
ONE THING ABOUT CAVITIES
THE AYE-AYE FINDS INTERESTING
IS THEIR SHAPE.
CARL MAKES A PAIR
OF X-SHAPED CAVITIES
AND GIVES THEM TO NOSFERATU
TO CHECK OUT.
THE AYE-AYE TAPS AROUND
APPARENTLY MAKING A MENTAL MAP
OF THE SHAPE
THEN SELECTS WHERE TO GNAW
VERY PRECISELY.
Erickson:
THE AYE-AYE SEEMS TO HAVE
SELECTED THE AREA
NEAR THE INTERSECTION.
AND THIS SUGGESTS TO US
THAT IT'S NOT SIMPLY DETECTING
THE CONFIGURATION
BUT IS GOING BEYOND THAT TO TRY
TO FIND A STRATEGIC LOCATION
AND REACH ALL THE ARMS OF THE X
THROUGH A SINGLE ENTRY POINT.
Alda:
CARL HAS MADE A CUT-AWAY BRANCH
WITH TUNNELS AND A CENTRAL HOLE
TO SEE WHAT'S GOING ON
INSIDE THE TREE.
NOSFERATU, AS USUAL, IS AN
ENTHUSIASTIC COLLABORATOR.
THE EXTRAORDINARY FLEXIBILITY
OF NOSFERATU'S MIDDLE FINGER
MEANS THE WORMS HAVE ALMOST
NOWHERE TO HIDE.
THE AYE-AYE MAY BE ONLY
A VERY DISTANT RELATIVE
BUT IN ITS ABILITY
TO CREATE MENTAL MAPS
AND IN PARTICULAR
IN ITS EXTRAORDINARY DEXTERITY
THERE'S A KINSHIP WITH HUMANS
THAT SHINES THROUGH
EVEN 70 MILLION YEARS
OF EVOLUTION.
FOR OUR LAST STORY, WE'RE
HEADING BACK TO CAYO SANTIAGO
ABOUT A HALF MILE OFF
THE SHORE OF PUERTO RICO.
WHILE THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS
YOU CAN LEARN ABOUT MONKEYS
IN CAPTIVITY
THERE ARE SOME THINGS-- LIKE
MATTERS OF SEXUAL POLITICS--
THAT CAN ONLY BE STUDIED
IN MONKEYS IN THE WILD
AND THE MONKEYS ON CAYO SANTIAGO
ARE ABOUT AS WILD
AS MONKEYS CAN BE.
( chattering )
900 RHESUS MONKEYS
LIVE ON THIS ISLAND TODAY--
THE DESCENDANTS OF MONKEYS
RELEASED HERE 60 YEARS AGO.
MOTHERS ARE AT THE CENTER
OF RHESUS SOCIETY
AS JOHN BERARD OF THE UNIVERSITY
OF PUERTO RICO HAS LEARNED
FROM 13 YEARS
OF MONKEY WATCHING.
THE MOTHER-INFANT
BOND IN PRIMATES
AS IN HUMANS,
IS VERY STRONG
AND THE WHOLE SOCIETY
REVOLVES AROUND MOM.
Alda:
THE CAYO SANTIAGO MONKEYS
HAVE BEEN WATCHED
BY GENERATIONS OF RESEARCHERS.
BUT PROBABLY NO ONE HAS
GOT TO KNOW THEM AS WELL
AS JOHN BERARD.
HE WILL COME SPEND
A PORTION OF EACH
DAY WITH HIS MOM.
Alda:
WANDERING THE ISLAND WITH HIM
IS LIKE BEING INTRODUCED
TO HIS EXTENDED FAMILY...
THIS IS HER
ADULT SON.
( loud screeching )
Alda:
AND SOME OF ITS SQUABBLES.
WHAT DO YOU THINK
HAPPENED?
THIS MALE WENT
AFTER THE INFANT
AND THEN THE MOTHER
CAME BY AND SCOOPED
UP HER KID
AND THEN TURNED AND
SCREAMED AT THE MALE.
Alda:
WHO BOSSES WHOM IS BUILT
INTO MONKEY SOCIETY.
FEMALES INHERIT THEIR RANK FROM
MOM AND KEEP IT ALL THEIR LIVES.
THIS IMPERIOUS BLOND MONKEY IS
THE GROUP'S DOMINANT FEMALE.
AND THIS IS THE DOMINANT MALE,
SCATTERING ALL BEFORE HIM.
( screeching )
WHILE THE MONKEYS
LIVE FREELY HERE
THEY GET SOME HELP
FROM THOSE WHO WATCH THEM.
THIS FEEDING CORRAL
PROVIDES MUCH OF THEIR FOOD
AND IS A GOOD PLACE TO SEE THE
DOMINANCE HIERARCHY IN ACTION.
WHAT'S MOST OF
THEIR FIGHTING ABOUT?
MOST OF IT ACTUALLY
IS JUST LITTLE
FAMILY SPATS.
LIKE WHAT? "IT'S YOUR
TURN TO DO THE DISHES?"
LIKE WHAT WOULD IT BE?
WELL, IT'S... OFTEN
IT'S HARD TO TELL.
IT'S SIMPLY,
"YOU'RE IN MY SPOT."
"YOU'RE IN MY SPOT"?
THAT'S WHAT
THEY FIGHT ABOUT?
THEY HAVE THIS
WHOLE ISLAND!
Alda:
UNLIKE FEMALES, MOST MALES
LEAVE HOME AT PUBERTY.
WHEN THEY JOIN A NEW GROUP
THEY ENTER AT THE BOTTOM
OF THE SOCIAL LADDER.
IT'S HUMILIATING AND STRESSFUL
AND JOHN BERARD'S RESEARCH
HAS BEEN AIMED
AT FINDING OUT WHY THEY DO IT.
THIS YOUNG FEMALE IS THE KEY
TO THE ANSWER.
FOLLOWED BY HER BABY,
SHE LEAVES THE FEEDING CORRAL
AND IS IN TURN FOLLOWED
BY A HIGH-RANKING MALE.
MOST PREVIOUS RESEARCH
ON MONKEYS WOULD SUGGEST
HE IS THE MOST LIKELY
TO MATE WITH HER.
BUT TAGGING ALONG IS A LOW-
RANKING NEWCOMER TO THE GROUP.
AND NOW AN ELABORATE GAME
BEGINS.
THE FEMALE IS IN CONTROL HERE
SITTING BETWEEN THE HIGH-
RANKING MALE ON THE LEFT
AND THE NEWCOMER ON THE RIGHT.
THE DOMINANT MALE STAYS CLOSE,
BUT THE NEWCOMER STROLLS AWAY
AND THE FEMALE FOLLOWS.
THE YOUNG MALE HAS FOUND
A SECLUDED SPOT IN THE BUSHES.
AS THE FEMALE HEADS TOWARD HIM
THE OLDER MALE SPOTS HER
AND CHASES HER AWAY.
( screeching )
BUT IT WAS CLEARLY A RISK SHE
WAS MORE THAN WILLING TO TAKE.
NOW, WHAT IS
THIS ATTRACTION
TO THE NEW GUY
IN THE GROUP?
IT'S LIKE ALL THOSE MOVIES
WHERE THE YOUNG GUY COMES IN
ON A MOTORCYCLE
AND HE'S NEW TO TOWN,
AND ALL THE WOMEN SAY "WOW!"
WHAT IS THAT?
I THINK IT'S THE
MOTORCYCLE THING.
THEY USED TO HAVE
MOTORCYCLES HERE
BACK IN THE '40s.
LITTLE MONKEY
MOTORCYCLES.
WHAT DO YOU THINK
IS THE ATTRACTION?
IT'S JUST NOVELTY.
YOU KNOW, IT'S
JUST PRETTY OBVIOUS
THAT THEY LIKE
NEW MALES.
WE'VE BEEN WATCHING
THE FEMALES IN THIS
GROUP FOR SIX YEARS
AND EVERY YEAR
IT'S THE SAME THING,
IT'S THE NEW GUYS.
FORGET ABOUT THE
GUYS THEY MATED
WITH LAST YEAR
FORGET ABOUT THE
LONG-TERM RESIDENTS.
IT'S JUST THE
NOVELTY ASPECT.
Alda:
BACK IN THE BUSHES
THE NOVELTY OF THE OUTSIDER
PROVES IRRESISTIBLE.
UNTIL AGAIN, THE DOMINANT MALE
INTERRUPTS
AND AGAIN VENTS HIS ANGER
AGAINST THE FEMALE.
( screeching )
JOHN'S RESEARCH SUGGESTS
A MALE'S HIGH RANK
DOESN'T CUT MUCH ICE
WITH THE GROUP'S FEMALES.
IN FACT, IT MAY ACT
AGAINST HIM.
DO MONKEYS DEVELOP A LONG-TERM
SEXUAL RELATIONSHIP HERE?
NO, TYPICALLY
WHAT HAPPENS IS
THAT MALES JOIN GROUPS
AND FEMALES
GO OUT OF THE WAY
TO MATE WITH
THE NEW GUYS.
SO THEY MATE THE FIRST
YEAR IN THE GROUP
THEN THEY BECOME
FRIENDS AFTER THAT.
BUT ONCE THEY
BECOME FRIENDS
RHESUS FEMALES DON'T
MATE WITH THEIR FRIENDS.
THE MATING STOPS AFTER
THE FRIENDSHIP STARTS?
SO IT'S LIKE SEX FIRST
AND THEN FRIENDSHIP,
AND THAT'S IT.
AND THEY NEVER REKINDLE
THE OLD FLAME?
ONCE IT'S OUT,
IT'S OUT.
Alda:
WHAT JOHN WANTS TO KNOW NOW IS
WHO IS FATHERING
MOST OF THE OFFSPRING
THE OUTSIDERS OR THE INSIDERS?
THERE'S ONLY ONE WAY
TO FIND OUT--
AN ISLAND-WIDE PROGRAM
OF PATERNITY TESTING.
THE RESEARCHERS ARE CAPTURING
THE MONKEYS ONE BY ONE
FOR BLOOD TESTING.
IT'S A TENSE TIME FOR PEOPLE
AND MONKEYS ALIKE.
JOHN FREES MOST OF THE MONKEYS
AND THE MOTHER AND BABY
HE'S AFTER
OBLIGINGLY RUN INTO A CAGE.
MOTHER AND BABY ARE
LIGHTLY ANESTHETIZED
SO THAT BLOOD SAMPLES
CAN BE EASILY TAKEN.
BOTH WILL WAKE UP IN AN HOUR
OR SO AND BE RELEASED.
THE RESULTS OF THE
DNA FINGERPRINTS
CONFIRM WHAT JOHN SUSPECTED:
THE NEWCOMERS TO THE GROUP
DESPITE THEIR
LOWLY SOCIAL STATUS
ARE SIRING AS MANY OFFSPRING
AS THE DOMINANT MALES.
SO THE ISLAND'S BABIES
HAVE MANY DIFFERENT FATHERS
AND THEREFORE
MANY DIFFERENT GENES
THANKS TO THE FEMALES'
TASTE FOR NOVELTY.
Alda:
WHAT DO YOU SUPPOSE IS
THE EVOLUTIONARY ADVANTAGE
TO HAVING NOVELTY
BEING EXCITING?
I MEAN, I PRESUME THAT THAT'S...
SOMEWHERE IN THERE IS WHY
NOVELTY IS A FACTOR IN THIS.
HOW DOES IT WORK?
THEIR KIDS ARE BEING SIRED
BY DIFFERENT MALES EVERY YEAR
AND THAT MUST BE ADAPTIVE
IN SOME WAY.
RHESUS LIVE IN A VARIETY OF
HABITATS, FROM PAKISTAN TO CHINA
FROM SEA LEVEL
TO HIGH IN THE MOUNTAINS.
SO IN ORDER TO ADAPT TO THAT
MANY DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENTS
PERHAPS IT'S IMPORTANT TO HAVE
A GENETICALLY DIVERSE STOCK.
Alda:
THERE'S ONE MORE SURPRISE
FROM JOHN'S RESEARCH--
ANOTHER REASON HIGH
SOCIAL RANK FOR MALES
CAN BE A CURSE
RATHER THAN A BLESSING.
THE SONS OF HIGH-RANKING FEMALES
INHERIT THEIR MOM'S RANK
AND THEY'RE TREATED LIKE PRINCES
BY EVERYONE IN THE GROUP.
THEY DON'T EVEN HAVE TO FIGHT
THEIR OWN BATTLES.
NO SOONER HAS THIS HIGH-BORN
SON PICKED A QUARREL
THAN A FEMALE FROM THE GROUP
RUSHES IN TO FINISH IT.
( screeching )
WHEN THESE PRIVILEGED MALES
FINALLY DO LEAVE HOME
THEY HAVE A MUCH HARDER TIME
OF IT THAN MORE LOWLY MONKEYS.
THEY'RE THE VICTIMS
OF MUCH MORE AGGRESSION...
( squealing )
AND MANY NEVER DO SUCCESSFULLY
ENTER A NEW GROUP
LIVING OUT THEIR LIVES
AS SOLITARY HERMITS
ON THE FRINGES
OF MONKEY SOCIETY.
Alda:
IT KIND OF SOUNDS
LIKE FAMILIAR BEHAVIOR--
YOU KNOW, THE PRIVILEGED KID
WHO CAN'T NECESSARILY
TAKE CARE OF HIMSELF
WHEN HE'S ON HIS OWN.
RIGHT, THEY DON'T
KNOW HOW TO BUY CORN
FLAKES OR ANYTHING.
THEY HAVE ALWAYS HAD IT
PROVIDED FOR THEM.
Alda:
WE BEGAN OUR EXPLORATION
OF THE PRIMATE WORLD
BY ASKING HOW MUCH OF OUR
NONHUMAN COUSINS IS IN US
AND HOW MUCH OF US IS IN THEM.
WHAT WE'VE FOUND CAN LEAD
TO A NEW APPRECIATION
OF BOTH THEM AND US--
OF THE THINGS WE SHARE THROUGH
OUR COMMON EVOLUTIONARY ORIGINS
AND OF THE THINGS THAT MAKE
EACH PRIMATE SPECIES UNIQUE
SINCE WE'VE GONE
OUR SEPARATE WAYS.
Alda:
IT'S EASY TO TALK ABOUT THESE
ANIMALS AS IF THEY'RE HUMAN.
A LOT OF THEIR BEHAVIOR SEEMS
LIKE OURS, SO YOU THINK
"THEIR THINKING PROCESS
MUST BE LIKE OURS," BUT IT...
OR MAYBE IT IS, I DON'T KNOW.
HOW MUCH IS IT?
AGAIN, YOU HAVE
TO BE CAREFUL.
YOU'RE ASKING, "WHAT'S
GOING ON IN THEIR MINDS?"
AND THE REAL ANSWER IS
WE REALLY DON'T KNOW.
ALL I KNOW IS
WHAT THEY'RE DOING.
IT'S OBVIOUS THAT THESE RULES
EXIST IN THEIR LIVES
BECAUSE ALL THE MALES
AND ALL THE FEMALES
DO THE SAME SORT OF THING.
WELL, WHAT ABOUT
WHEN THEY'RE...
Alda:
AND AFTER AN HOUR
OF MONKEY WATCHING
I BEGAN TO WONDER JUST
WHO WAS WATCHING WHOM.
TAKES A LIKING TO...
THIS GUY IS JUMPING AROUND
FROM TREE TO TREE.
HE'S GOT HIS EYE ON ME.
THAT'S BECAUSE YOU'RE
THE NEW GUY HERE.
SHE KNOWS THAT.
AND SHE'S DOING THIS
LIP-SMACKING THING AT ME.
THAT'S SIMPLY
A SIGN OF
ASSURANCE.
IT'S NEITHER AGGRESSIVE
NOR SUBMISSIVE.
SHE'S NOT BLOWING
ME KISSES?
NO.
PRESENTATION OF
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN FRONTIERS
IS MADE POSSIBLE BY A GRANT
FROM GTE CORPORATION.
AT GTE, IT'S AMAZING
WHAT WE CAN DO TOGETHER.
[Captioned by
The Caption Center
WGBH Educational Foundation]